there is a very peculiar and very
architectural a distinctive Buddhist
temple off in the distance there I guess
you guys can't see it at all it's funny
how a cell phone camera captures some
things with tremendous accuracy but some
things further off in the distance it
seemingly cannot capture it all
I had a question a couple of months ago
someone ready to ask me a longtime
supporter of the channel
why didn't I simply resolve to get rich
before doing these other things with my
life before deciding to study languages
before deciding to do humanitarian work
and in many cases as you probably know
the languages I was studying in the past
were directly linked to my political
humanitarian aspirations so obviously I
was not learning a language like lotion
in order to get rich I was not learning
language like Cambodian to get rich let
alone Cree in a jib way first nations
languages indigenous languages of Canada
well let you in a little secret right
now I'm learning Chinese and I'm not
doing in order to get rich so somebody
wrote in to me a longtime viewer the
channel asking in a sympathetic way
why didn't I devote some years of my
life to making as much money as possible
before embarking on these other research
interests of a humanitarian interests
political interest so on and so forth
I said recently in a video on a very
different topic that when we talk about
impatience we are talking about a very
complex phenomenon in an overly
simplistic way what do we mean when we
say that someone is impatient very often
what we mean in fact is that they refuse
to listen to what you're saying so it is
commonly said in our culture that people
who have become wealthy people who've
gotten rich or people are very
successful in the course
oh they're impatient they're too
impatient to listen to this to listen to
that they take on imperious arrogant and
impatient mannerisms and behaviors we
would not use the same description for
the same behavior in a religious context
for example
if I am speaking to a devout Muslim and
I'm describing the history of how Islam
slaughtered Buddhists in the past how
they murdered Buddhist monks who had no
weapons and offered no military
resistance how they looted pillaged and
burned down Buddhist temples right in
the core of the Buddhist heartland
destroying you know the geographic and
cultural center of Buddhism from
discussing that sort of history with
someone who actually believes in
practices Islam they may act very
impatient indeed they may cut me off in
mid-sentence they may interrupt me they
may quarrel with me without being able
to actually speak to the substance of
the facts right
they may also stand up and walk out of
the room right
this kind of impatience what we mean by
impatience it's not impatience at all
right it's a refusal to listen and the
refusal to listen to a contrasting point
of view it may come out of a kind of
strength but more often it comes out of
a kind of weakness right there's maybe a
fear that by listening to this person by
listening to their view of the world by
listening to the facts they have to
present at the experiences they have to
share maybe it's gonna your own faith
your own certainty your own self
confidence maybe you're gonna lose faith
in Islam in this case there are Muslim
certainly many times I have spoken with
Communists and socialists and it's been
obvious to me that they're afraid to let
me speak they want to interrupt me they
want to cut me off or they want to walk
out of the room or they want to just
insult me you know throw insults at me
and shut down the conversation because
they can't listen to what I'm saying
again we could describe this as
impatience but is impatience really the
word and this again for someone who's a
communist or a socialist comes out of a
fear that if they listen to me it will
take away some of their faith some of
their certainty in this case in a
religious story in this case in a social
doctrine a political doctrine but it
resembles a religious doctrine and it's
fervor I recently heard an interview
with a kind of political commentator
here on here on YouTube guy makes his
living talking about politics in the
internet and he said that he was a big
believer in socialism until he went and
visited
the Soviet Union he went to Russia in
the early 1980s as soon as he started
living in Russia he lived there for some
time continuously he wasn't just the
tourist he completely lost all faith and
not just communism but socialism itself
his political views radically changed
because he saw the depressing horror of
daily life in the Soviet Union so some
people are open-minded and flexible
about those things and some people are
brittle so they will refuse to hear what
you say they will shut themselves off to
reality so why are these behaviors why
is this frame of mind associated with
the acquisition of wealth why is it
associative my task also with some
professor put some professions some
career paths more than others does
success necessarily have to lead to
arrogance and close-mindedness no it
doesn't but it's remarkable the
consistency I see among computer
programmers for example is an amazing
amazingly consistent set of arrogant
imperious close-minded brittle
thin-skinned vengeful behaviors it goes
much deeper than your impatience where
people who work in computer science
computer bro don't want to hear what
you're saying I've had reason to reflect
in the last few days about my
interactions with a young man who
dropped out of his ph.d program I was
thinking about partly you know I made
that video thing that you shouldn't drop
out of university in order to do YouTube
full time he did exactly that this guy
Harrison Nathan I mention him on the
channel couple times he dropped out of
his ph.d program in mathematics in order
to try to do basically YouTube full time
he was gonna do digital vegan activism
on YouTube on Instagram on Facebook and
all the platforms he had high hopes to
himself and man I had one conversation
with that guy I could not believe what a
jerk he was to me I could not believe
how imperious and high-handed and
reproachful and his sense of
self-importance sense that he was the
expert in this and I was the beginner
whereas I was already like five years
deep into talking about vegan
I'm on YouTube so dude I have a lot of
experience in this field I have a lot of
inside knowledge of this how it works
that I could share with you you could
stand to learn a lot from me but instead
you're using this conversation as an
opportunity for you to lecture me about
how how morally superior to me you
supposedly are how you know better than
I do
well what it is to be successful in in
specifically this forum and specifically
in doing YouTube videos about politics
and veganism it was mind-blowing but I
had to reflect that and have to reflect
now that guy's behavior his attitude his
outlook on life it's been formed by the
experience of devoting his time and
energy and his thinking to mathematics
in a way that I can only slightly
imagine right I've had different jobs
where I was doing math every day and
your way of thinking changes you get of
course you get better math you become
conversant with numbers in the same way
that thinking and speaking Chinese every
day you become conversant with the
vocabulary that the Chinese language
your patterns of thought in being a
computer programmer in being a
mathematician and then the way that
translates to impatience again really
meaning something much much more
profound and deep than our word
impatience in English would normally
suggest how that translates to
impatience with person to person face to
face reality political reality social
reality how it leads to a very different
kind of struggle with the human
condition and indeed a certain kind of
brittleness we are not willing to listen
to the other person's perspective that
was Harrison's main problem Harrison
couldn't listen to me and why was that
again with the comparisons already have
been established to what it's like
talking to a devout Muslim if what
you're saying maybe threatens their
sense of faith we're talking to a devout
communist what you're saying threatens
their sense of faith I think for him the
problem is if he could talk to me about
veganism or even he could talk to me
about YouTube well being a youtuber that
would threaten his sense of belief in
himself
the ultimate religious and social
doctrine the ultimate cult is the cult
with just one member one leader one
follower
it's the cult of believing in yourself
and a lot of these people the reason why
they can't talk to me or why they they
can't be open-minded to and really hear
and receive and respond to whether
critically or otherwise other people's
perspectives is this feeling that it
threatens their in their sense of self
sorry about the noise pollution here
guys I can get up and give you a
different view of this park as has been
established this particular camera will
not give you much of a view off the edge
of this mountain
so look suppose the question were asked
to me why didn't I take a few years to
get rich to to just get rich right to
just amass a fortune to just earn a
bunch of money in one one profession or
another one trait or another you know I
think that to say that you know it's
really kind of insulting to the people
who've made the tremendous sacrifices
that are required to get rich and those
sacrifices very often are sacrifices on
the level of oh come on all right I'm
not gonna put up with stray dogs
attacking me for this video you know
people talk about selling your soul to
get rich well that may be a bit maudlin
but it often comes close enough to that
I had a friend a very good-looking
female friend who was thinking about
going into real estate and the real
estate business if you're not born rich
is one of the few reliable ways of
really making a lot of money in the
english-speaking Western world these
days in so-called developed economies
and she had connections in the field she
knew people who are successful in it she
a few people who owned real estate
brokerages firms she had she had various
advantages including as mentioned that
she was good-looking and let's face it
real estate is a tremendously shallow
business they are definitely interested
in good-looking
women who can stand there and present a
property and the sort of thing they're
much more interested in how you look in
real estate than your knowledge of
microeconomics or what-have-you
it's a field anyone can get into and
many people switch careers in midlife go
out and get a real estate license and
she talked to me about this was sometime
her thoughts or plans about going to
real estate and then she said to me one
day suddenly from my perspective she
came to the realization that she didn't
want this job she'd never take up a
career in real estate
because she didn't want to be nice to
people she didn't want to pander to
people day in and day out that's her
professional duty and she realized I
assumed it was that she went to some
real estate event she was in some
contexts where she saw what the job was
like in practice she realized that being
in real estate what it meant was smiling
at people and serving them platters of
small sandwiches and serving them coffee
and taking them to see a house and
asking them about how many kids they've
got and how many kids they want and do
they have a pet dog do they want to have
a backyard for the dog and isn't that
wonderful and isn't that nice and how
many cars do you have and what kind of
garage do you want for the cars that
this kind of endless hobnobbing was
absolutely crucial to your career if you
really wanted to make money in real
estate now the type of change the type
of transformation you'd have to undergo
to work in real estate you have to love
the city you're living in you have to
learn the geography of the city learn
the neighborhoods drive around that city
constantly there's a certain level of
math involved but above all is I think
she was right I think she made the right
decision that what she identified was a
social element for the job that would
really require her to change the way she
thinks the way she acts that would
really force you to reconsider the type
of person she wanted to be take on a new
set of behaviors and even a new identity
there in this sense getting rich is
never easy and don't get me wrong I
could tell you now stories of people who
made money especially in computer
science you know within my generation
especially you know in in some high-tech
businesses viewers who made money
without ever working a day in a coal
mine without ever carrying a heavy load
of wood in their back without doing any
of the hard work that would be involved
in buying a plot of forest land and
chopping down the trees and turning it
into a farm conventional medieval ways
of becoming wealthy yes in some ways
getting rich can seem effortless but in
terms of this type of sacrifice in terms
of the transformation of your character
in terms of who you are and who you will
become
the type of sacrifice type of
transformation is really quite profound
I definitely was not born into
circumstances where I was tempted to get
rich one way or the other
I was definitely born into a family
where I was told that earning money was
basically evil my parents were far more
left-wing than the average communist
that a human being shouldn't be
motivated by money at all this sort of
this sort of thing was very much part of
my upbringing but above and beyond that
I was sensitive to the fact that when
you choose a career when you choose a
profession when you choose to compromise
not just ethically look I don't just
mean compromising with your employer but
I mean when you take on a body of
knowledge and you inhabit it and you use
it you live with it every day the way
that a mathematician lives with his
numbers the way that a chess champion
memorizes and thinks in terms of a
hundred different ways to open a game of
chess and a hundred different ways to
end a game of chess this kind of
commitment in your thinking and feeling
and your perception of the world and the
narrowing of the mind that comes with it
and the impatience towards any other
perspective and the inability to hear
other people's perspectives because the
threatens your perspective I see all of
these consequences that come from the
most intimate compromises that becoming
wealthy entails and looking back at my
youth looking back at the decisions I
made at the end of university sure I
made a lot of bad choices
that I regret but I looked at my
professors and university I looked at
all the role models that surrounded me
and I thought I'm not gonna make the
same mistakes as you people I at least
I'm gonna get out there while I'm young
and strong well I'm not yet injured well
I can take risks and live with the
consequences I'm gonna get out there I'm
gonna make my own mistakes for myself
now
and both the terrible disadvantages that
brought in my life and have also had the
rewards